Blog post: Responsive SSR (#566)
artsy/artsy.github.io: _posts/2019-05-20-server-rendering-responsively.md

using SSR for many reasons, amongst them performance.
[We wrote about this all the way back in 2013](https://artsy.github.io/blog/2013/11/30/rendering-on-the-server-and-client-in-node-dot-js/)!

We've also built our site using responsive design, so you get a browsing experience optimized for your device.

Combining SSR and responsive design is a non-trivial problem. There are many concerns to manage, and they are
sometimes in conflict with each other. We server render for performance reasons, but we also want to be sure our
app is performant when your browser takes over, all while optimizing for accessibility and SEO.

This article describes the tools we use on [artsy.net](https://artsy.net) to combine SSR and responsive design.

<!-- more -->

## Tool 1: [`styled-system`](https://styled-system.com)

We handle the majority of responsive styling differences with
[`styled-system`](https://styled-system.com/responsive-styles). This has been a really great addition to our
toolbox. Here's a component that would render a `div` (`Box`) with a width of 50% at our mobile breakpoint, 75% at

> our tablet breakpoint, and 100% for anything larger:

Reviewer: We don’t actually talk about ‘mobile’ and ‘tablet’ breakpoints afaik and [below](https://github.com/artsy/artsy.github.io/pull/566/files#diff-a879e573d311218fd7eec7da14d776f5R81) you mention `xs`. Perhaps there’s a way to reword this without the device references?

```xml
<Box width={["50%", "75%", "100%"]}>
  ...
</Box>
```

Here's a real example
[from our codebase](https://github.com/artsy/reaction/blob/f3dabb884d616c5c42bbd47b1432dc2a9456b8ca/src/Apps/Search/Components/SearchResultsSkeleton/Header.tsx#L6).

```xml
<Box height={100} mb={30} mt={120} pr={[0, 20]} pl={[0, 20]}>
  <Box pl={[20, 0]}>
    <Box mb={40} background={color("black10")} width={260} height={20} />
    ...
  </Box>
</Box>
```

> There are a lot of abbreviations in there - `mb` sets the bottom margin, `mt` sets the top margin, `pl` sets the

Reviewer: styled-system v4 allows for actual (long-form) words, so I think it might be better to update the example and let the code speak for itself, instead of having to add explanations here.

https://github.com/styled-system/styled-system/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v400-2019-02-23

Author: Sounds like an improvement. I'll make this change.

component sub-trees. We couldn't find an approach that satisfied our needs, so we wrote our own.

## Tool 2: [`@artsy/react-responsive-media`](https://github.com/artsy/react-responsive-media)

First off, an announcement: we've just released `react-responsive-media` version 1.0! (TODO: release v1.0 😬 or
change this announcement)

`react-responsive-media` allows you to define a set of breakpoint widths, then declaratively render component
sub-trees when those breakpoints are met. It looks something like this:

```xml
<>
  <Media at="xs">
    <MobileLayout />
  </Media>
  <Media greaterThan="xs">
    <NonMobileLayout />
  </Media>
</>
```

In this example, we're emitting the `MobileLayout` component for devices at or below our `xs` breakpoint, and the
`NonMobileLayout` for devices greater than our `xs` breakpoint. You can imagine that the `MobileLayout` and
`NonMobileLayout` components contain complicated sub-trees, with more significant differences than `styled-system`
could handle.

### How it works

The first important thing to note is that when server-rendering with `react-responsive-media`, **all** breakpoints

> get rendered by the server.

Reviewer: > …and `Media` components are wrapped by plain CSS that will only show them on the client if the breakpoint matches the user’s current browser size. This means that the client can accurately start rendering the HTML/CSS _while_ it receives it, which is long before the React application has booted and thus leads to improved visual end-user performance.

Author: (Suggested in https://github.com/artsy/artsy.github.io/pull/566/files#r286231699)

> get rendered by the server.

Author: ```suggestion
get rendered by the server. Each `Media` component is wrapped by plain CSS that will only show that breakpoint if it matches the user's current browser size. This means that the client can accurately start rendering the HTML/CSS _while_ it receives it, which is long before the React application has booted. This improves perceived performance for end-users.
```

Why not just the one that the current device needs? A couple reasons. First, we can't _accurately_ identify which

> breakpoint your device needs from the server. We could use a library to sniff the browser `user-agent`, but those

Reviewer: ```suggestion
breakpoint your device needs on the server. We could use a library to sniff the browser `user-agent`, but those
```

the server with `react-responsive-media`. This way, we know you're going to get a branch that matches between the
client and server. Then, upon hydration, we prune the branches that don't match the current breakpoint.

If you're interested, you can
[read the issue that originally inspired us to build `@artsy/react-responsive-media`](https://github.com/artsy/reaction/issues/1367).
One of the neat things about Artsy being [open-source by default](/series/open-source-by-default/) is that you can
see decisions being made and libraries being built _as they happen_; not just after they're complete.

## Tool 3: [`@artsy/detect-responsive-traits`](https://github.com/artsy/detect-responsive-traits)

I mentioned above that it's difficult to accurately detect devices by user agent to identify which breakpoint to
render. We didn't want this to be our primary strategy for combining SSR with responsive design.

But with `react-responsive-media` as our primary approach, we felt that we could make some further optimizations
with user agent detection. In the event that we don't know your device by its user agent, we'll still give you both

> the desktop and mobile breakpoints from SSR. But if we are certain you are on a mobile device, we can omit the

Reviewer: > we'll still render all the breakpoints on the server.

?

> desktop breakpoint from the server render.

Reviewer: > But if we are certain you are on a device that only ever needs a subset of the breaktpoints, we only render those on the server. This saves a bit of rendering time, but more importantly we cut down on number of bytes that need to be sent over the wire.

We really wanted to not maintain our own list of user agents. Alas, we found that none of the existing user agent

> detection libraries surfaced all the information we needed. We needed to know the minimum width for a browser on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
detection libraries surfaced all the information we needed in a single resource. We needed to know the minimum width for a browser on a
```

Not sure if that's the best way to explain that we needed to get bits of data from various sources.

given device, and if it was resizable, and to what dimensions it was resizable. If any existing libraries _did_
have this data, they didn't provide it to us easily.

So we did some experimentation, given the browsers and devices we knew we needed to support. And yeah...we
(reluctantly) created our own user-agent detection library,
[@artsy/detect-responsive-traits](https://github.com/artsy/detect-responsive-traits). We're using this to determine
if your browser is likely going to use only the mobile breakpoint of our app, in which case we don't have to also
render the desktop version. The library is currently targeting only the browsers and devices we support on
[artsy.net](artsy.net), but
[we're always open to contributions](https://github.com/artsy/detect-responsive-traits)!

> We aren't doing any detection of desktop browsers. Maybe this is something we do in the future, but for now we are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We aren't doing any detection of desktop browsers, as they are generally resizable to any size. For now we are
```

You may want to rework that second sentence, but I just want to make clear that there isn’t any point in sniffing desktop user agents.

more concerned with mobile users getting less content sent over their 3G connection.

## Why didn't you use \_\_\_?

Those are our primary tools for combining SSR with responsive design! They work well for us. We considered many
many other options along the way. Here are a couple:

### [`react-media`](https://github.com/ReactTraining/react-media) or [`react-responsive`]()

We investigated both `react-media` and `react-responsive`, but found that they didn't approach the SSR side of the
problem as deeply as we needed.

We also weren't fans of the imperative API in `react-media`. We started with a similar API when building
`react-responsive-media`, but learned that it limited our ability to render all breakpoints from the server. The
API requires only one branch to be rendered, and this caused the aforementioned mismatches when the app would
hydrate.

With `react-responsive`, we didn't like that it relied on user agent detection as its primary method of handling
SSR.

> ### CSS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Can’t rely solely on CSS
```

> We explored the idea of rendering all breakpoints from the server, and hiding the non-matching branches with CSS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned before, we render all breakpoints from the server and hide the non-matching branches with CSS.
```

> The issue with this approach is that you have many components that are mounted and rendered unnecessarily. Aside

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The issue with this approach, when combined with React, is that after hydration you have many components that are mounted and rendered unnecessarily. Aside
```

from the performance hit you take for rendering components your user isn't seeing, even worse is the potential for

> duplicate side-effects.

Reviewer: We actually _do_ do this and it works great. (I think that should actually be one of the first things to mention in the “How does it work” section, I'll write up a comment there.)

_However_, we couldn’t leave it at just that, because having React render **components** [as opposed to pure HTML/CSS] at _all_ breakpoints could lead to side-effects.

Reviewer: I wrote up some suggestions to address this, but feel free to reword those.

Author: I think I've worked in enough changes that this is addressed...let me know if you feel otherwise!

problem as deeply as we needed.

We also weren't fans of the imperative API in `react-media`. We started with a similar API when building
`react-responsive-media`, but learned that it limited our ability to render all breakpoints from the server. The
API requires only one branch to be rendered, and this caused the aforementioned mismatches when the app would
hydrate.

With `react-responsive`, we didn't like that it relied on user agent detection as its primary method of handling
SSR.

### Rely solely on CSS

As mentioned before, we render all breakpoints from the server and hide the non-matching branches with CSS. The
issue with this approach, when combined with React, is that after hydration you have many components that are
mounted and rendered unnecessarily. There's a performance hit you take for rendering components your user isn't
seeing, but even worse is the potential for duplicate side-effects.

Imagine a component that, when rendered, emits a call to an analytics service. If this component exists in both a
mobile and desktop branch, you're now double-stuffing your analytics. Hopefully your analytics service is smart

> enough to count both calls, but it's still a bad idea to duplicate components that have side-effects.

Reviewer: I feel like here we should repeat that we don’t render these branches at all on the client, to avoid this issue.

We handle the majority of responsive styling differences with
[`styled-system`](https://styled-system.com/responsive-styles). This has been a really great addition to our
toolbox. Here's a component that would render a `div` (`Box`) with a width of 50% for small screens, 75% for
medium-sized screens, and 100% for anything larger:

```xml
<Box width={["50%", "75%", "100%"]}>
  ...
</Box>
```

The next example is based on actual code
[from our codebase](https://github.com/artsy/reaction/blob/f3dabb884d616c5c42bbd47b1432dc2a9456b8ca/src/Apps/Search/Components/SearchResultsSkeleton/Header.tsx#L6).

```xml
<Box height={100} marginBottom={30} marginTop={120} paddingRight={[0, 20]} paddingLeft={[0, 20]}>
  <Box paddingLeft={[20, 0]}>

>     <Box marginBottom={40} background={color("black10")} width={260} height={20} />

Reviewer 2: 👍
